📘 BudgetWise – Milestone 1 Documentation
AI-Based Expense Forecasting Tool (Infosys Springboard Internship)
🧩 1. Project Overview

BudgetWise is a personal expense analysis and visualization tool developed as part of the Infosys Springboard Internship (Milestone 1).

This milestone focuses on understanding the fundamentals of data analysis using Python libraries — NumPy, Pandas, and Matplotlib.

The goal of this milestone is to:

Load and analyze expense data from a CSV file.

Calculate total and average expenses.

Visualize spending patterns through bar and line charts.

Build a foundation for AI-based expense forecasting in future milestones.

📅 2. Project Timeline
Phase	Task Description	Duration	Status
Day 1–2	Understanding project requirements and dataset structure.
Day 3–4	Learning and practicing NumPy, Pandas, and Matplotlib basics.
Day 5	Implemented code for data loading, analysis, and visualizations.
Day 6	Testing, verifying outputs, and reviewing insights.
Day 7	Documentation writing and GitHub repository creation.
Total Duration	1 Week	

📂 3. Dataset Description

The dataset used is expenses.csv, containing 10 rows and the following columns:

Column	Description
Date	Date of the expense transaction
Category	Expense category (e.g., Food, Travel, Shopping, Bills, etc.)
Amount	Expense amount in ₹ (Indian Rupees)

The small dataset was used to demonstrate core data-handling and visualization techniques.
In future milestones, it will be expanded to 10 K – 20 K rows for AI and forecasting tasks.

⚙️ 4. Technologies and Libraries Used
Library	Purpose
NumPy	Used for numerical computations such as total and average expenses
Pandas	Used for loading, cleaning, grouping, and summarizing data
Matplotlib	Used for visualizing data in bar and line charts
Python 3.x	Core programming language used for implementation

🧹 5. Data Preprocessing

Before analysis, the dataset underwent several preprocessing steps:

Data Loading – Imported the CSV file using pandas.read_csv().

Inspection – Displayed the first few rows with display(data.head()) to verify structure.

Conversion – Converted the “Amount” column into a NumPy array for numerical operations.

Grouping & Aggregation – Grouped data by “Category” and “Date” to calculate total expenses.

Sorting – Sorted categories by highest total to improve readability of charts.

Verification – Checked for missing or duplicate values; dataset was clean.

📊 6. Data Analysis and Visualization
🔸 Step 1 – Total and Average Expense

Calculated using NumPy:

total_expense = np.sum(amounts)
average_expense = np.mean(amounts)


Displays total and average spending across all categories.

🔸 Step 2 – Category-wise Analysis

Grouped data by category:

category_summary = data.groupby('Category')['Amount'].sum().sort_values(ascending=False)


Helps identify which expense categories have the highest totals.

🔸 Step 3 – Bar Chart: Category-wise Expense

Created a bar chart to visualize total spending per category.
The highest-spending category was highlighted in orange for emphasis.

🔸 Step 4 – Line Chart: Daily Expense Trend

Plotted daily totals to visualize how spending changes over time.

💡 7. Insights Gained

The bar chart clearly shows which categories consume the most budget.

The line chart highlights daily expense trends and fluctuations.

Calculating total and average expenses provides a quick financial summary.

This milestone demonstrates the link between raw data and meaningful visuals.

🧠 8. Learnings and Skills Developed

Fundamentals of data analysis in Python.

Working with Pandas DataFrames for grouping and summarizing.

Performing mathematical operations using NumPy arrays.

Creating visualizations using Matplotlib.

Writing and documenting structured, readable Python code.

Understanding how data preprocessing improves the accuracy of insights.

🔮 9. Future Scope (For Milestone 2)

In the next milestone, the project will be enhanced with:

Larger Dataset (10 K – 20 K rows) to simulate real-world data.

Data Cleaning – Handle missing values, outliers, and duplicates.

Time-Based Analysis – Monthly or weekly spending patterns.

AI-Based Forecasting – Predict future expenses using machine-learning models (Linear Regression).

Advanced Visualizations – Pie charts, histograms, box plots, etc.

Automated Insights – Dynamic reports summarizing key findings.

👤 10. Author

Name: Mitul Chhajed
Program: Infosys Springboard Internship
Milestone: 1 – Expense Analysis using NumPy, Pandas & Matplotlib
Duration: 1 Week
